# Verifying asynchronous code

Rust supports writing asynchronous code without manually managing which thread a
given task is performed on using the `async` and `await` keywords. This
functionality is often useful for managing multiple IO-bound tasks. [This Rust
book chapter](https://doc.rust-lang.org/book/ch17-00-async-await.html) contains
a detailed introduction to this feature.

## Basics

Verus supports reasoning about code using `async`/`await`. Just
like regular `fn`s, `async fn`s can be annotated with `requires`
and `ensures` clauses:

```rust
{{#include ../../../../examples/guide/async_await.rs:basic_async_ensures}}
```

`result` in the `ensure`s clause refers to the value of the future,
once it has completed. At a call site of `add1`, the postcondition
is only known to hold once the future is awaited:

```rust
{{#include ../../../../examples/guide/async_await.rs:basic_async_caller}}
```

`assert(future@ == 42)` fails because the postcondition of an
unawaited future is guarded by an uninterpreted `.awaited()` predicate
that is known to be true only if a future has been awaited.

```rust
{{#include ../../../../examples/guide/async_await.rs:basic_async_caller_awaited}}
```

Assertions about futures that have not yet been awaited are often useful when
writing functions that consume other futures as input; for example, consider
the function `branch_and_await` that conditionally awaits only
one of its arguments.

```rust
{{#include ../../../../examples/guide/async_await.rs:basic_async_future_branch}}
```

## Mutability

`async fn`s can also take mutable references as arguments and change their
values. The mutations are only known to have taken effect once the future
has been awaited.

```rust
{{#include ../../../../examples/guide/async_await.rs:async_mut}}
```

*Note*: Technically, Rust guarantees that after creating, but not `await`ing,
`f`, `*x` will still have value `42`. However, to avoid complex tracking of when
a future may have started executing, Verus treats this imprecisely and considers
`x` to have an unknown value as soon as it is passed to `mutating_arg`, until
the resulting future is `await`ed. Please create an issue if you have a use case
where knowing that a future has not yet started to execute is important.

## Using libraries

`async`/`await` is frequently used with supporting libraries such as
[tokio](https://tokio.rs/) that provide a runtime support to execute
asynchronous code, as well as additional primitives. For example, `tokio`s
`select!` macro allows racing multiple futures and acting on the first future
that completes. Note that the examples below require the `macros` feature of the
`tokio` dependency to be enabled. To verify the examples, run `cargo add tokio -F macros`
in your project once, and then use `cargo verus verify` instead of plain Verus invocations.

```rust
select! {
    add1(42) = r1 => r1,
    add1(21) = r2 => r2,
}
```

This code runs both futures `add1(42)` and `add1(21)` concurrently and returns
the value of whichever completes first; the syntax `expr = var => ret` binds
the value `expr` completed with to `var` and executes expression `ret`.

While `verus` does not natively understand how to reason about the code
generated by the `select!` macro, we can use mechanisms for specifying
assumptions on external code, such as `#[verifier::external_body]` for
specific uses of `select!`:

```rust
#[verifier::external_body]
async fn race_futures<T>(f1: impl Future<Output = T>, f2: impl Future<Output = T>) -> (res: T)
    ensures
        (f1.awaited() && res == f1@) || (f2.awaited() && res == f2@),
{
    tokio::select! {
        a = f1 => a,
        b = f2 => b,
    }
}
```

The above postcondition is *trusted*! Verus does not check that the body in fact
guarantees the postcondition. It states that after `race_futures` completes, one
of the two input futures will have been awaited and its result returned. This
can then be used in callers:

```rust
let f1 = add(3, 5);
let f2 = add(7, 5);
let result: usize = race_futures(f1, f2).await ;
assert(result <= 12);
```